# Lecture 19: Muscle Function

## Muscle Innervation
**Myogenic muscles:**	contraction generated by trigger from within the muscle. 
* Found in **cardiac** muscle.

**Neurogenic muscles:** stimulated to contract by neural activity. 
* **Skeletal** muscles innervated by motor neurons.

## Troponin-Tropomyosin Complex
**Tropomyosin:** Double stranded protein spanning ~7 actin monomers. Blocks myosin binding sites on actin.

**Troponin:** A 3-subunit complex.
* **TnC:** Calcium-binding sites
* **TnI:** binds actIn
* **TnT:** binds Tropomyosin

### Regulation of actino-myosin binding:
1) Calcium binds to TnC
2) TnI releases actin
3) Troponin-tropomyosin complex moves away from myosin-binding sites 
4) Myosin is free to bind to the actin

Muscles **actively shorten** and **passively lengthen**. Troponin and tropomyosin key in allowing muscle relaxation along with opposing muscle contractions.

## Motor Control
Motor cortex and other motor control centres send signals through descending tract of spinal cord. **Motor neuron (efferent) axons** leave  ventral root.
* *Cell Bodies* in the **ventral horn**
* These neurons innervate **neurogenic** muscle fibers.
* **Size** of ventral horn reflects extent of motor innervation.

### Somatic Branch
This is usually under conscious control. **Motor neurons** innervate the skeletal muscles.
* Longest neuron in body
* Induce contraction and relaxation patterns for diff movts (*antagonistic muscles*)
* **Acetylcholine** = Neurotransmitter at the neuromuscular junction: always **excitatory**

### Neuromuscular Junction
1. Action potential results in ACh release. VG Ca2+ channels open and increase in internal [Ca2+] leading to vesicle docking
2. Binds nicotinic ACh receptor (nAChR) on skeletal muscles. **nAChRs** are ligand gated ion channels. Ions (mostly **Na+**) depolarize muscle
3. Induces muscle contraction
4. **AChE** (acetylcholinesterase) breaks down ACh into choline and acetate, terminating the signal.
5. Presynaptic cell takes up and **recycles choline**. **Acetate diffuses out** of the synapse.

* **Motor end plate:** Regions of the myofiber where axon terminals of motor neuron synapse.
* **Sarcolemma:** myocyte membrane. Resting potential is ~**-70mV**
  1. ACh binds to nAChR, ion channel opens
  2. Na+ enter myofiber
  3. Sarcolemma depolarized, VG Na+  channels open,
  4. depolarization propagates to **T-tubules** (sarcolemmal invaginations)
  5. VG Ca2+ channels open
  6. Na+ and Ca2+ channels close
  7. VG K+ channels open, repolarization occurs

## Skeletal vs Cardiac muscle action
**Skeletal Muscles:** depolarize and repolarize quickly (short refractory period).
* AP = 5% of contraction-relaxation cycle
* 2nd AP can induce 2nd contraction even if muscle hasn’t relaxed
* **Tetanus:** Perpetual muscle spasm
* Results in *summation* and can lead to tetanus

**Cardiac muscles:** long repolarization phase (long refractory period).
* VG Ca2+ channels stay open longer
* AP = 50% of contraction-relaxation cycle
* **Arrythmia:** when a 2nd contraction occurs while the muscle is contracting.
* No summation or tetanus, but addition of contractions can lead to arrythmia

## Other Myocyte Structures

**T-tubule:** *transverse* tubules. Extensions/invaginations of the sarcolemma allow APs to propagate deep into myofiber quickly. 
* System is extensive in large or quick-contracting muscles (e.g. *fast-twitch* skeletal muscles)

**Sarcoplasmic Reticulum:** muscle endoplasmic reticulum. Extensive network has high **Ca2+ stores** ([Ca2+] in cytoplasm is low)
* Ca2+ released from SR -> contraction. Ca2+ pumped back in SR -> relaxation.

**Terminal Cisternae of SR:** Enlargements of SR near T-tubules. They increase capacity of Ca2+ storage and ensure *rapid* Ca2+ delivery. 
* Extensive in fast-twitch skeletal muscles, less developed in slow-twitch muscles (e.g cardiac muscle).

## Excitation-Contraction (EC) Coupling in Skeletal and Cardiac Muscles

### Ca2+ Transporters and Channels
On **sarcolemma**...
* **DHPR:** VG Ca2+ channel abundant in T-tubules
* **Ca2+ ATPase:** pump Ca2+ *out* into ECF
* **Na+/ Ca2+ exchanger (NaCaX)**

On **sarcoplasmic reticulum:**
* **RyR:** Ca2+ channel
* **SERCA:** Ca2+ ATPase, pump Ca2+ back into SR

### Cardiac EC Coupling
Cardiac muscle: **Ca2+ induced Ca2+ release**
* *At rest:* [Ca2+]i low
  * DHPR channels closed at resting membrane potential
  * [Ca2+] high in ECF and SR
* Myogenic depolarization opens DHPR channels
    * *ECF Ca2+ required* to activate RyR
    * Ryanodine receptors (RyR) open in response to local  increases in [Ca2+]
    * Elevated [Ca2+] allows more Ca2+ to escape the SR. This also triggers actino-myosin ATPase
* *After repolarization*, ion pumps (SERCA, NaCaX and sarcolemma Ca2+ ATPase) return Ca2+ to resting locations.

### Skeletal EC Coupling
Skeletal muscle: **Depolarization-induced Ca2+ release**
* *At rest:* DHPR physically interact with RyR; Activation of RyR happens even if no Ca2+ ions move through  DHPR (from ECF)
* As sarcolemma is depolarized DHPR channels open
  * Conformational change in DHPR channel opens RyR
  * Both result in increases in [Ca2+]i
* Relaxation is the same as in cardiac EC coupling.

## Review of Striated Muscles: Cardiac vs Skeletal
**Cell Morphology:**
* Cardiac: Single cardiomyocytes about 10-20um in diameter and 100um in length
* Skeletal: Multiple cells fuse together into large myofibers 10-100um in diameter and 1-100 mm in length

**Excitation:**
* Cardiac: Myogenic and involuntary
* Skeletal: Neurogenic and usually voluntary

**Action Potential:**
* Cardiac: Slow repolarization with long refractory period
* Skeletal: Fast repolarization with short refractory period

**EC Coupling:**
* Cardiac: Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release
* Skeletal: Depolarization-induced Ca2+ release

**Sarcoplasmic Reticulum:**
* Cardiac: Well-developed terminal cisternae in birds and mammals. Poorly developed SR in lower vertebrates
* Skeletal: Amount of terminal cisternae depends on fiber type

## Force vs Shortening
Different types of muscle rely on specific arrangements of sarcomeres to carry out different functions.
* Hypothetical situation for one sarcomere: generates 5 pN of force and can shorten 0.5um
* 1000 of these sarcomeres in **series** = 2500 um long; generates 5 pN of force **but** can **shorten** 500um
* 1000 of these sarcomeres in **parallel** = 2.5 um long; shortens only 0.5um **but** can generate 5000 pN of **force**
* Muscle arrangment optimized for different types of contraction: **maximal force vs maximal shortening**.

Activated muscle can:
1) shorten: e.g. lifting rock up
2) lengthen: e.g. walking down, sitting, lowering rock down
3) remain the same length (isometric): e.g. back muscles maintain posture

* **Isometric contraction:** Tension changes to allow muscle to remain the same length; **same length, changing tension**
* **Isotonic contraction:** tension remains unchanged and the muscle's length changes (e.g. lifting object at constant speed); **same tension, changing length**

### Elastic elements are stretched: Viscoelastic system of muscle
* A muscle must be stretched before tension can be applied to load
* Tension increases isometrically (stretching of viscoelastic system) to overcome force exerted by load; then, muscle shortens if  tension > load
* **Series elastic components:** Tendons, Z-discs, Cross-bridges
* **Parallel elastic components:** Sarcolemma, Muscle connective tissue

### Muscle Twitch, Temporal Summation, and Tetanus
**Twitch:** contraction resulting from a single AP
**Latent period:** time between stimulation and contraction (relies on time of EC coupling and stretch of series elastic components)
* Potential tension produced is low; Ca2+ is quickly lost. 
* Ca2+ pumped back into SR  before cross-bridges can fully stretch out the elastic elements.

**Temporal Summation:** Amounts of force generated by single AP add up as the frequency of AP increases.
* Second AP arrives before contraction finishes
* Strength of force generated increases with AP rate
* Successive APs = RyR channels  opened with sufficient frequency, so Ca2+ keeps the myosin-binding sites on actin *exposed*

**Tetanus:** maintained contraction with repeated stimulation
* To *maximize force*, we need to maintain an active state
* Cross-bridges can cycle repeatedly until the elastic elements are stretched tightly and the full contractile potential of the muscle fiber is realized.
* In tetanus, maximal contractile response, maximal force generated.

Twitch vs tetanic contraction?
1) Maximum tetanic **force** generation ~3-5x strength of twitch force generation
2) In twitch: Ca2+ sequestered before full tension generated, but in tetanus: active state is **prolonged**
3) Whole muscle generally operates at a tetanic level: maintained active state, fatigue results if prolonged.

### Recruitment of Motor Units
**Motor unit:** a motor neuron and the muscle fibers it innervates.
* Each myofiber controlled by one motor neuron (but  1 neuron innervate many myofibers)
* At muscle level: many different motor units
* ↑ Recruitment= ↑ # of active  motor units
* Whole muscle tension ↑ as more motor units send APs
